Sort of slowly coming up to the best part namely the pot were about to run our gradient descent algorithm
on our means squared error cost function but before we dive into the python code and calculate in which
direction our algorithm should move we need to work out the slope of our cost function first namely
our gradient and this is where I've got some great news for you because we just have to apply some of
the same calculus tricks that we've covered so far and these partial derivatives that are coming up
are really not that hard to figure out.
So let's dive in.
Now you'll recall that our means quite Ara function looks like this hits one over n times the sum of
Y minus y hat squared.
So the actual values minus the predicted values squared you son them all up and you take the average.
But the thing is since we're running a very simple linear regression on this with one variable only
namely X are Y that actually takes the form theta 0 plus theta one times X..
This is the linear regression model that we're using currently it's got one variable and two parameters
theta zero and theta one.
So what does this mean about our means squared error.
Well if we take our equation and we simply substitute our model our linear regression model into this
equation for y hat then we get something like this.
And by removing those parentheses we can simplify this to the following form are means squared error
for this particular linear regression model actually looks like this.
We've got one over n times the sum of Y minus theta zero minus theta one times X squared.
But you know what we can take this even further.
Check it out when we're going to do now is we're gonna write out all the terms in this equation.
So this is the opposite of simplifying it but it's going to make calculating our partial derivatives
a lot easier.
We can figure out all the terms in this sum like so firstly we can multiply out all the terms in this
equation and that means we get something like this.
We get quite a few terms starting with Y squared.
But of course as a few terms in this long list that we can combine so we'd actually get something like
this when we simplified a little bit.
Now I know that that doesn't look very pretty but the great thing about having the equation written
out like this is that we can calculate partial derivatives very very easily.
So what I want to do is I want to start this lesson out on a challenge I would like you to get out pencil
and paper and try to apply the power rule to the equation above to our mean square area equation and
take the partial derivative with respect to theta zero.
So our int. I'll give you a few seconds to pause the video before I show you the solution.
Ready.
Here we go now looking at this equation the first thing you'll notice is that there are quite a few
terms that don't depend on theta zero namely Y squared to theta one x y and theta one squared times
X squared for a partial derivative.
These terms are treated as constants and they drop out of the equation.
This is what we've talked about before.
So what are we left with.
Well we're left with the following sum minus two y plus two times theta zero plus two times theta one
times X..
And this is simply from applying the power rule that we covered in a previous lesson.
Looking at this equation we can simplify it a little bit to make it look a bit prettier.
The first thing I'm going to do I'm going to factor out the two that all these three terms in the sum
have in common.
In fact I'm actually going to factor out a minus two and I'm left with something like this.
I've got minus two times why minus theta zero minus theta one and then what I can do is I can simply
move this constant outside of the sum sorry equation would actually look like this and that's really
it.
That's the partial derivative with respect to theta zero.
One thing that you might have noticed is that I've left out the little eyes in the superscript in this
derivation hand and I'm going to put those back now for you.
I left them out earlier because otherwise the notation would have just gotten too busy on the slide.
So now that we've worked out the partial derivative with respect to our first parameter we can work
out the partial derivative with respect to our second parameter namely theta 1.
Once again I'm going to pose this as a challenge to you because you've worked out this one.
Working out the other one is very very similar.
You go through exactly the same steps but you'll get a slightly different result.
I'll give you a few seconds to pause the video and scribble this down with pencil and paper.
Ready.
Here's the solution
the equation that you get at the end when you go through all the steps and you simplify it will look
something like this.
It'll be very very similar to the partial derivative with respect to theta zero.
Except that you're multiplying the entire thing by the x values at the end of the sum with these two
equations in front of us.
We can now add them to Jupiter notebook once again the first thing I'm gonna do is add a section heading
with some markdown an hour later.
Equations.
This section heading I'm going to call partial derivatives of the mean squared error with respect to.
Then I'm gonna add a dollar sign a backslash and write theta on the school 0 and then another dollar
sign and dollar sign backslash theta underscore one dollar sign using the dollar signs.
I'm including some later notation in line for our section heading and it's going to look like this when
I press shift enter.
But let's add our partial derivatives in latex notation as well so I'm going to add two hashtags to
pound symbols than to Dollar Signs and write are fraction.
So it's gonna be backslash F R A C pair of curly braces and then another pair of curly braces.
And within the first pair of curly braces I'm gonna write backslash partial MSE and then in the second
pair of curly braces I want to write backslash partial backslash theta underscore zero and that whole
thing is gonna be equal to but before I add that bit Let's take a quick look what this looks like so
I'm going to add my two dollar signs at the end.
Press shift enter and there I can see my fraction with the partial derivative symbols in front okay
so just so we have our equation in ha.
Jupiter notebook as well.
Let's write it out here together.
So it's gonna be minus and then backslash Frank curly braces to curly braces and spacing.
And then backslash some underscore curly braces I equals 1.
Curly braces.
Carrie curly braces.
And then backslash big open parentheses y carry curly braces.
And then inside parentheses I minus backslash theta zero minus backslash theta on the school one X Carrie
curly braces.
And then inside parentheses I.
And then the last bit is gonna be backslash big closing parentheses.
Let's see what this looks like.
I might say that's pretty spot on.
I'm just gonna click inside here and add the second one as well.
This is the easy part.
This is where we just copy what we've just written pasted below.
And then change this thing here to theta one and then at the end we're going to add backslash big open
parentheses x Carrie curly braces parentheses.
And then backslash big closing parentheses.
That's it.
Now we've got our partial derivative equations displayed beautifully and Jupiter notebook.
So one thing that I'll note here is that you know these partial derivatives are gonna depend on what
kind of equation we're using for y hat at this point.
We're using linear regression with one variable so we substituted that in the.
And then we derived our partial derivatives from that if we had a different model say linear regression
with two variables or something that estimates are Y had a little differently then we'd simply substitute
that equation into our means squared era and then we can do the same derivation if we're so inclined.
Because that means quite error cost function lends itself very well to all sorts of regression problems.
And it will adapt very very well to all kinds of models as well.
So having written out the partial derivatives in this form we can create a function where we calculate
the slopes of the parameters in Python code so I might add a little section heading here and I call
it MSE and gradient descent.
And then that python function I'm going to add here.
Now what I'm going to do is I'm going to create a function called grad s IDF grad and I want to give
it three inputs and give it the X the y values and an array of factors.
And when I say colon and then inside the body of this function I want to work out these two partial
derivatives.
So what are my inputs here.
My inputs are the x values so the data the y values.
Again this is also data.
And then I have an array of theta parameters.
These are the bits that we're actually optimizing in our gradient descent algorithm.
This array is gonna have theta 0 and index 0 and theta one at index 1.
So this is gonna be my function the number of samples.
So n I can work out by saying and it's equal to why not sides dysfunction is going to get a whole list
of y values and by calling white outsides I can work out how many samples were given to this function.
Now as a challenge can you create two variables theta zero underscore slope and theta one underscore
a slope and what I want you to do is I want you to translate these latex equations into Python code
I'll give you a few seconds to pause the video and work this out.
Ready.
Here's the solution.
So theta zero underscore slope.
It's gonna be equal to minus two divided by n times the sum of Y minus fetus square brackets zero minus
fetus square brackets 1 times x.
So we're expecting that this function will receive an array of theta parameters and I'll have to theta
zero at index zero.
So this is what we're using here and we have theta one at index 1.
So this is what we're using here.
Now working out our theta 1 underscore slope is gonna be trivial because I can just copy this.
Change the name here and then simply add another set of parentheses to our sum and multiply the whole
thing by X.
Again that way I can capture this term in the equation here so that's really it.
The only thing left to do is output these values and we're going to output this stuff as an array.
I'll show you three ways we can do this.
It's a little bit of a review so we can write return and p dot array open parentheses square brackets
theta zero underscore slope.
And because this is an array as well we just have to pull out the first value of it and then write a
comma and then theta one underscore slope and then grab the first value of that as well.
Now this is one way you can do it.
We've calculated these two things separately so we can combine them into an array like so.
But I'm going to comment this out and show you a second way so we can also return NDP don't append open
parentheses the first argument is gonna be our theta zero underscore slope and then our second argument
that's gonna be theta 1 underscore slope.
So this is a second way we can do it.
We can append this array to this one and return that as well.
So that way we can combine these two pieces of data that were calculated separately and append them
to each other.
The last way I want to show you is with the CONCATENATE function.
So this is also from num pi.
I mean num pi dot concatenate parentheses and then another set of parentheses where we're gonna supply
theta zero underscore slope comma theta one on the school slope and then we just have to supply how
we're gonna concatenated namely along the roads.
So axis equals zero.
So these are three ways you can write the python code to achieve the very same output.
Now it's time to run our gradient descent and actually call this function.
So I didn't make any typos so let's do that now.
This is where the rubber meets the road.
As they say I'm going to get my multiplier to zero point zero one and I'm going to set my initial guesses.
So my theta is equal to an NPR Ray where our initial guesses are two point nine comma two point nine
all in square brackets and then our gradient descent is gonna look like this.
It's gonna be for i in range when I run this a thousand times.
Colon and then in the body of for loop we're gonna have some very terse Python code that calculates
our gradient and then updates are theta as Array.
All in one go.
It's gonna be fetus is equal to fetus minus multiplier times Grant.
This is where calling our function.
Now we have to supply our data.
Right.
X underscore five comma Y on the scroll five.
This was the data that we generated earlier and then last.
Input is gonna be our status array just like that after a loop has run and uh print out the results.
So this is where we can check if our thing actually works.
And I'm going to find out if I'm had any typos along the way.
So I'm going to print and I'm going to say the min occurs at theta zero colon comma.
And this is gonna be Peter's square brackets zero because that's where our intercept is gonna live.
It's gonna live at index 0 first value in our theta array and let's print out the minimum at theta one
as well.
So it's gonna that one's gonna be in a print statement min at theta one and then comma Theatre's square
brackets one.
And finally we're gonna print out our means squared error.
So when I use that M S E function that we created earlier.
So I'm gonna say print MSE is colon comma and S E this is a function call parentheses and then we have
to supply two things here.
Remember why underscore five.
So the actual y values and then y hat what s y hat.
Well after our loop runs it's gonna be they square brackets 0 plus theta has square brackets 1 times
are X data.
So X underscore 5.
All right.
So we've just written a whole bunch of code without having tested it in a little while.
Let's see if it works and it shift into now and I'm pleasantly surprised.
We get after a thousand iterations we get theta zero value of point eight five and theta one value of
point 1 to 2 and mean square error of zero point nine five approximately.
And this very much ties out with all the calculations we've done previously.
So we've definitely done this correctly.
We've worked out the partial derivatives of our cost function and then we've run our gradient descent
algorithm and this gradient descent algorithm started pretty far off started at two point nine for both
our theta zero and our theta one values.
And then in that for loop having run a thousand times it converged on the values that minimized the
means squared error that minimized our cost function.
So this is brilliant.
Now all that's left to do is to plot it.